+++
title = "Structures"
author = ["Kiran"]
date = 2024-07-02T16:54:00-04:00
tags = ["sv"]
draft = false
css = "../../zcustom.css"
+++

[SV Verification Directory]({{< relref "2024_06_27_16_53_00_sv_verification_directory.md" >}})


## Structure {#structure}

One of the biggest limitations of Verilog is the lack of data structures. In SystemVerilog, you can create a structure using the struct statement. A structure is a collection of data that can be synthesized.

Example of struct:

```verilog
struct {logic [7:0] data_a, data_b, data_c;} data_s;
data_s in_data;
```

NOTE: By default a structure is unpacked.


### Typedef for Struct {#typedef-for-struct}

To create multiple structure variables it is necessary to use typedef data type.


### Packed Structure {#packed-structure}

A structure is declared as packed with the packed keyword. Packed structures are used when the underlying bits represent a numerical value to when you are trying to reduce memory usage.

Example of declaring packed structure:

```verilog
type struct packed {logic [&;0] data_a, data_b, data_c} data_s;
data_s in_data;
```


### Choosing Between Packed and Unpacked Structure {#choosing-between-packed-and-unpacked-structure}


#### Packed {#packed}

-   If you plan on making aggregated operations on the structure, such as copying the entire structure, a packed structure is more efficient.


#### Unpacked {#unpacked}

-   If your code accesses the individual members more than the entire structure use an unpacked structure.

Reading and writing elements with odd sizes in a packed structure requires expensive shift and mask operations.
